+++
title = "Quantifying spatial variability and biogeochemical controls of ecosystem metabolism in a eutrophic flow-through wetland"
date = "2012-01-01"
publication_types = ["2"]
authors = ["Jonathan J. Maynard", "Randy A. Dahlgren", "Anthony T. O'Geen"]
publication = "In: Ecological Engineering, (47), _pp. 221--236_, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoleng.2012.06.032"
abstract = "Wetlands are highly dynamic ecosystems that exhibit large temporal and spatial gradients in biogeochemical and metabolic processes. While previous studies have documented temporal variability of wetland metabolism, very little is known regarding how wetland metabolism varies spatially. This is particularly relevant for constructed flow-through wetlands used to treat agricultural runoff due to growing concern over the potential for these systems to act as incubators of biological oxygen demanding (BOD) substances (i.e., algal biomass) and contributors to downstream hypoxia. This study employed a spatially explicit characterization of wetland water column properties using multiparameter water quality sondes, thus allowing the calculation of wetland metabolism across a range of spatial scales (meters to 100s of meters). This study documented a high degree of spatial variability in metabolic rates within the wetland, with average gross primary productivity (GPP) ranging from 6.41 to 13.69gO 2m -2d -1, community respiration (CR) ranging from 4.85 to 9.79gO 2m -2d -1, and net ecosystem production (NEP) ranging from 0.35 to 2.42gO 2m -2d -1. Linkages between metabolic rates and environmental controls were quantified using a spatial/temporal statistical approach. Five key environmental parameters (turbidity, dissolved reactive phosphorus, ammonium, electrical conductivity, and temperature) were found to correlate with ecosystem metabolism. Results from this study show that despite high rates of primary productivity, high respiration rates limited NEP in this wetland due to high heterotrophic activity. \\textcopyright 2012."
abstract_short = ""
image_preview = ""
selected = false
projects = []
tags = []
url_pdf = ""
url_preprint = ""
url_code = ""
url_dataset = ""
url_project = ""
url_slides = ""
url_video = ""
url_poster = ""
url_source = ""
math = true
highlight = true
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""
+++
